Hi Guys, My name is Nitesh and you welcome to my YouTube channel. In this video we are going to cover a very important JNAI topic and the name of the topic is Lang Smith. So till now we have been covering the syllabus and curriculum of JNAI in a very structured manner. We started with Lang Chen. After that we started the lung graph which is not completed yet. It is in progress. But while reading Lang Graph, we have actually come to a stage where we need to understand how to implement observability. That learning comes in LLM applications. And that's why I thought let's take a little D tour. And I teach you LENGTH, which in itself is a very powerful observability and evaluation tool that you can integrate into LLM applications. So in today's video, first of all I will give you a little theoretical background as to why a lungsmith is needed? What is observability of any LLM system? And then I will show you in great detail by practically integrating the length with Lang Chen and Langraff Both. And lastly I will give you a little idea about an emerging field called LLM Ops which is kind of related. So on the whole, if you watch this video completely then I am pretty sure you will learn something new and very important. Ok? There is only one disclaimer. If you want to follow this video completely then there are two prerequisites. First, you should have an idea of ​​Lang Chain and second, you should have an idea of ​​all the Lang Graphs that I have taught you so far. this If you know both these things then you will not have much difficulty in understanding while consuming today's video. Rest I am super excited for this video. I really hope you like this video. Now let's start the video. Now before reading Lansmith in detail, I want to discuss with you once why there was a need to use tools like Lansmith. Ok? And to explain this, I will discuss some real world scenarios with you. Ok? Let's start with scenario number one. so scenario number One is that you work in a startup and your team has identified a problem with students. They noticed that when students graduate from college, they start looking for jobs. Now the process of finding a job is such that students go to websites like ncry.com. Give filter jobs for themselves there. He chooses the job he likes. They study the JD of that job and modify their resume and cover letter on the basis of that JD. And then once this modified cover letter is made, apply. Now the problem is that students have to do this process 10 times a day or it may be more than that. Because once you go to nc.com and are job hunting, you may see 10 or more such jobs in a day where you feel that yes, I should apply and you would not want to apply everywhere with the same resume and same cover letter. Because you would like me to make the employer feel that I have made an effort. Right? so this The whole process is searching for the job, studying the JD, matching the skills and modifying your cover letter. You have to do this multiple times in a day. So here your startup team identified a problem and you thought that we can create an LLM based application which will solve this problem of the students. Ok? And you guys have also created such an application. And what is the way this application works, what the student does here is that he goes to this website and puts the link of a JD or Uploads a PDF. Ok? Where the description of the job is given. After that what this tool does is that it studies that JD. Ok? Tries to understand him. After that, this tool goes to the student's Google Drive account and fetches all the portfolio, resume, projects, whatever details it finds about the student there. Now he also has JD and complete profile of the student. So he performs a matching match between them to find out what Are the relevant skills with the help of which the student can apply for this particular job. Ok? What will he do after that? He will prepare a cover letter specific to this job. Ok? And not only that, he will also proof read the cover letter to see if there is any problem in it. The tonality is correct. Will sending this particular cover letter result in conversion or not? After doing all this analysis, he finally gives you a cover letter and students can use it any number of times throughout the day. 10 times, 20 times, every time he gives you a The cover letter is modified according to the given job. Ok? So you released this tool. The students also liked it very much. Your users are also using it on daily basis. And normally the latency of your system is basically the time taken after entering the input till the output comes out, generally it remains around 2 minutes. But suddenly you observed that one particular day you started getting a lot of mails that your website has become very slow. It has become slow. Meaning the work which earlier used to be done in 2 minutes. A B. It is taking 7 to 10 minutes to do that. And because of this your users are getting frustrated. They are becoming impatient and leaving your platform. And obviously this is not a good thing for your startup because here again you will start losing revenue. Ok? So what do you have to do now? You have to quickly debug this system to find out where the problem occurred? But what is the problem in this whole system? That it is a complex LLM work flow which basically means that there are multiple stages. different stays Different types of work are happening here and at many places you are interacting with LLMs. Ok? Like, to study JD you need LLM. To perform this matching you need LLM. You need an LLM to generate this cover letter. And you also need LLM to do final proof reading. Ok? So this kind of complex LLM work flow is not easy to debunk. Because you only have this information about what the user gave as input and what he got as output and how much time was taken in this entire process. , But you don't have this individual breakdown. For example, you don't have any idea how much time it took to read and understand JD? How much time did it take to retrieve documents from a user's portfolio? How much time did it take for matching? So you get my idea. There are multiple stages. This work flow is made in a very complex manner. It may also have branches etc. So you just have the initial input and the final outcome. And the total time taken is ination. But you don't know that this increase in latency It has increased from 2 minutes to 10 minutes. Which of these components is consuming the remaining 8 minutes? Now unfortunately since you don't have this particular tool or this particular option. To break down and understand things. Your debugging process will become very difficult. Ok? This can happen, let's say that in the last update you accidentally pushed a code due to which now instead of scanning a specific folder in Google Drive, you are scanning the entire Google Drive. due to which a lot of It's time. So maybe this is the stage where we are fetching the documents. But again since we cannot go inside this system and understand what is going on in a step by step process. That's why we can't identify whether the extra 8 minutes of delay is being caused by the portfolio scanning process. So I really hope first of all you are able to understand what is the problem in this whole process? The problem is increased latency but you are not able to identify which one Because of this problem arose. Now this is where tools like length comes into the picture. Ok? How? I'll tell you in a little while. But before that I would like to share with you one more use case example. Now the second example is that of a research assistant which is basically an agent which you and your team have created and what is the work of this particular assistant that it helps the researchers. How let me tell you. So any researcher can enter a topic in this tool. For example you put a solar a Nerji. So what will this tool do? First of all, he will fetch all the academic research papers related to that topic from websites like Google scalar or archive.com. What will he do then? He will study each paper and extract the points. Ok? Once all this reading is done and the key points are extracted, what your research assistant will do is summarize all those key points. And will give him a report form and you will get that report as a user. Now what you can do is you can chat about that report, you can ask questions about that report, so you have created this research assistant tool, Chat GPD also gives you a similar tool, I guess you must have used it too. So suppose we have created this particular tool and this tool is being appreciated a lot. Our users are also using it on a daily basis. They are also paying us some money. So our business is going well. now ace Let us assume for the sake of discussion that it costs you around 50 paise to generate a report. Ok? Because obviously if you are using LLMs then a lot of tokens are being generated and if you are using OpenAI's API then they are charging you some money. Ok? So suppose it takes you 50 paise to generate a report and you also charge some money from your users. Obviously you have understood your profitability. You are charging money accordingly. But what happened suddenly one day that you Observed that your cost shown in Open AI dashboard has suddenly started increasing. So when you understood a little breakdown, you found that suddenly some reports are costing ₹2 instead of 50 paise to generate and the rest of the reports are still being generated for 50 paise. So because of this ₹2 report there is a spike in cost and at scale it can be a huge cost. If you have a lot of users and suddenly instead of 50 paise you have to spend ₹ 2, then you can imagine how much your cost will be in a day. You can't even imagine how much will go away in a month. And since your users are the same and you are taking the same amount of money from them, your cost will suddenly become very high and you will go into loss. Which is not good. So obviously what do you have to do? Now we have to come quickly and debug this agent, brother, what has happened suddenly that some reports are being made for 50 paise like before but some reports are being charged for ₹ 2. Now to do this debugging you must first understand how agents work. A Gents are software applications that are autonomous. Ok? Meaning, you give him a goal and after that the entire system automatically applies reasoning to pursue that goal. Performs some action. Then he thinks whether I have achieved the goal or not and continues doing this in a loop. Ok? Now, hypothetically speaking, it could happen that in your last upgrade you pushed a code where you made a minor change in your prompt and you wrote in the prompt that keep generating the report till then. Until a very good report is made. This basically means that if the agent does not like the quality of the report then he will repeat the entire process. He will again go to the Google Scholar website. He will download and bring the papers again. Will study again. Will extract the key pointers again. Will summarize it again and make a report. Will analyze again whether the quality of report is good or should I repeat the whole thing again. Now what is happening with this particular upgrade? This particular year What is happening by pushing people is that in some reports your agent is getting happy that yes the report I have made is correct and he is showing it to the user, then your work is getting done for 50 paise. But for certain topics, your agent may feel that I didn't do that well. I do it again. So he is going again and repeating the entire process. Basically he became Aamir Khan because he wanted perfection. And why did all this happen? Because you changed a prompt in the last upgrade. Minor change one or two Changed the intention and kept doing it until you got the best result. And you wrote this paragraph because you wanted to improve the user's experience. Right? You wanted the user to like the final report he received. But what is happening with this single PrP chain? Your agent's behavior changed and that too not always. In some particular scenarios it is working exactly the same as it was working before. But then in some scenarios his behavior is changing due to which the cost runs away. now you Just look at how difficult debugging is for the developer who created this agent. First of all, the same error is not coming every time. Sometimes he is coming, sometimes he is not coming. Errors are printed somewhere and are not visible. Because obviously it's not like the code is cracked. So no error trace is visible anywhere in the process. And there are multiple stages in this work flow. So you don't even know in which particular stage you are spending more money. So again a similar kind of situation where you have built a proper System that your users are liking. But if there is any problem in it, in this case the problem of cost. There was a problem of excessive token usage. You are not able to see inside the system which particular component is causing the problem. So again we require a tool that gives us an inside view of this entire system. Convert this entire black box system to white box and we can see what is going on in each component step by step. Ok? So again I hope the previous example I gave you about latency It was related. I gave you this example related to cost. I think you are able to understand where the problem is. So till now we have talked about two use cases. The first use case was an LLM work flow and the second use case was an agent. Now let's talk about a third use case which will be rack. Ok? So let's consider a scenario. Suppose you are working as a senior software developer in TCS and you have identified a problem within TCS. The problem is that TCS is a very big organization in which lakhs of people work. And every year thousands of people as freshers join this company. Now since this is a very big and very old organization, there are a lot of rules in this organization. For example rules around leaf policy For example rules around notice periods. Ok? A health insurance. There are many types of things. Ok? Now the freshers who join do not understand about these things. So what they do is that whenever they have doubt, they go to HR and ask these questions to HR. Now HR people complain The reason is that we have to answer these same questions on a daily basis. Due to this our productivity is decreasing. So you as a senior software developer thought that we can solve this problem by making a chat bot. What we can do is that we can create a knowledge base by accumulating all the documents of the company where all this information is there and we can provide that knowledge base to an LLM and a chatbot will be created and then any fresher will come and talk to this chatbot, he will get the answer. basically you Are planning to make a rag based chatbot. How will this whole system work? The user will come and ask his question, what is the leave policy? Your chatbot will enter the knowledge base according to the question. Will fetch and bring relevant documents. He will pick up both the relevant documents and questions and give them to the LLM. LLM will see the questions. It will look at the documents that have been fetched and on the basis of both of them it will generate a response in natural language English and you have created this system. Ok? And again this system is Working Perfectly. Your freshers came and started asking questions. What is leaf policy? What is the scene of health insurance? What is the scene of notice period? And he started getting answers. And this kind of extra pressure on your HR has been removed. But again just like any other LM based system, suddenly something went wrong here too. What's going wrong is that your teammates are complaining that your chat bot has started hallucinating. Basically he is giving the answers by imagining. No factual answers Is giving. Due to which misinformation is spreading in the company. For example, an employee went and asked what is the leave policy? And your chatbot said that there is no load. You can take leave whenever you want. If you want to go to Goa then go. Now that guy packed his back and left. Whose fault is it? of your chatbot. Right? This information was given to him by the company's chat bot. Right? So you can understand how serious the concerns can be. There may be concerns related to the notice period. There may be concerns related to salary and the company Miss infection can spread. So there was a very serious problem. Now you are told that since you have created this chart word, you have to debug it fast so that this information misinformation does not spread in the company. Now again I would like to emphasize on this point that how difficult it is to debug a rack based system. Especially if he is hallucinating. Why? Because any rack base system hallucinates mostly because of two reasons. Reason number one is your retriever who fetches the relevant documents after seeing the question. that Components may not function properly. Meaning, he read the question and could not fetch the document as per that question. The question was about the notice period. He is bringing the documents. If the company history is not relevant then from where will the LLM answer and the second failure point is around the generator. If your LLM answers, then maybe you have used a local LLM of low quality or Open AI has done some upgrade due to which the quality is off. Answering has gone bad or you It was written in such a way that your LLM is not giving good answers. Ok? So it could be anything. So it may happen that when you last upgraded your chatbot, you accidentally set the value of n, the number of retrieved documents, to one in the retriever component. One is two less. For some queries, you may be able to pull enough context from a single document. But it may happen that there are many questions where more than one document is required from you. so this n = 1 is to less. So should you keep maybe three or five? Right? So this could be a problem that is attached to the retriever. The second problem could be that in the last upgrade your teammate wrote a prompt that is a bit lazy. Lenient is in the sense that he is not enforcing very strongly to give answers to your LLM in context. Basically, how do you have to write? In the rack based component or in the LLM application, you write something like context that you call LLM. That whatever you have to answer has to be done from the given context only. If you are not getting enough information from the given context to answer then simply say I don't know. But it is possible that in the prompt you wrote, you did not specify it so strongly and whenever the LLM does not see the relevant content in the context, then it gives some answers of its own free will. Now the problem can come from two places but your problem is that you do not know whether the problem is happening with the retriever or the problem with the generator. sold Cause you can't see inside this system. You don't know which documents the retriever fetched. You don't know what exactly the final prepared form with the question and the context looks like. And because of these problems, it is very difficult to deepen this system for hallucination. And again we are seeing the requirement of such a system, such a tool which can tell us step by step what each component is seeing, what it is doing, it would be great. Ok? So now I think We are able to understand with the help of the three scenarios. The first scenario where we saw that there was latency and we were not able to debug. The second we saw that the cost had increased we couldn't understand it. Third we saw the system is hallucinating. We don't know why he is doing this. After looking at all these things, guess you understand why you need a tool that will tell you what is going on inside the system. So now let's formally introduce what is Lungsmith? Before introducing butt length, let me tell you one more thing. I would like to bring to you a term which you will hear a lot in the future and the name of that term is Observability. So guys, here I have added a definition of observability. Let's read it once. So observability is the ability to understand a system's internal state by examining its external outputs like logs, metrics and traces. It allows you to diagnose issues, understand performance and improve reliability by analyzing data generated by the system. Essentially It's About Being Able to Answer Why Something Is Happening within a system. Even If You Didn't Anticipate the Problem. Ok? What was common in the three examples we have seen so far? The common thing was that all these three systems are LLM based systems. Right? And the most complex thing in LLM based systems, the most difficult thing is that the behavior of LLMs is non-deterministic. What does non deterministic mean? Generally, whatever software you choose, if you always give the same input to it, then you will get Mesha bean output will appear. There is a calculator in which you do 2 * by 4 and do this 1000 times, you will see the same output every time. But what happens in LLM based systems is that for the same input and same kind of input you can get different output. And because of this particular reason, if any problem arises in LLM base systems, be it latency problem, cost problem or hallucination problem, then it becomes difficult to debug it. Because this problem does not leave any proper error trace for you. And obviously this sis Tums are complex. Are black box systems. There is no explainability. So due to these reasons, when you deploy LLM based applications in production, it becomes very difficult to debug them. And then here the concept of observability helps you. The basic idea of ​​observability is that with the help of any tool, you can completely reveal the internal working of your system and see what is happening component by component. How each component is doing its job. Ok? This is basic Fund of observability. So what you do is when you run your software once and execute it, you trace it end to end. Ok? And this trace gets stored somewhere, which you can see anytime in the future and understand where the problem is happening. So if now I tell you the form formula what is Langsyth? So look here I wrote Lungsmith is a unified observability and evaluation platform where teams can debug test and monitor AI app performance. Ok? so nuts Lungsmath is basically a tool with the help of which you can bring the concept of observability into your LLM based applications or systems. You will run, execute your LLM application and with the help of length you can trace that entire execution. Component by component. Inside Langsith, you will see clearly what inputs each of your components is taking and what outputs they are giving. How much time did that particular component take to do its job? Everything will be recorded at a very granular level. Correct Is? This is what the limit is. So what do we do now? Now That We Have Understood What is the Problem? And how Lungsmith exactly solves that problem. Now we will go to the ground practically and take samples. Practical examples, codes and in that we will introduce, implement, integrate Lang Smith. Ok? So my plan is to first show you the integration of Lang Smith with Lang Chen. Then let me show you the integration of Langsmith with Lang graph also. And in this whole process I will also test the normal work flow. Will also test rag based work flow. Will also test the agentic work flow. So you will get an end to end idea how with the help of Lang Smith you can implement observability in any kind of LLM work flow. Ok? So I really hope the discussion so far was meaningful for you and you are excited for what's to come. Before starting the practical, I forgot to tell you one more small thing. Let me quickly cover that when you look at Observability Implement with the help of length. And when you lock every trace of every execution inside Lansith, then you will see in practice after some time what exactly Lansith traces, but I want to tell you in advance. So what does langs do? Traces every input and output of every execution. Ok? The user ran your app. He gave some input and got some output in return. Like he asked what is the capital of India? So this is his input and the LLM has turned back to your application. He turned around and said, New Delhi. So you trace both these input and output things. Apart from this, you trace all the intermediate states or steps completely. Ok? So if there is a rag based system then what question did the retriever get? What context did the retriever generate? What questions did we ask in the preparation? What context did you send? What did LLM generate? What did the output parser see? We track all these intermediate steps carefully. Apart from this, what is the latency? How much time is your system taking to provide mature system edge in output? You track this too. Not only at application level but also at component level. Apart from that, what is the token usage. Depending on the model you are using, you are told how many tokens you are using. And also how much cost you will have to pay to use those tokens, both input tokens and output tokens. After that you are informed if any error occurs in any of your components. Apart from that, if you want, you can add your own tags etc. You can set up tags and there are also some system generated tags. For example, if you are using a GPT 4O model, Langsith is smart enough to automatically tag the trace with the model name. Ok? Apart from that, you can attach custom meta data if you want. The system itself also has some meta data attached to it. For example, if you are using Luck Chain, then which version of Luck Chain you are using and which are the dependencies, all this is automatically locked. And lastly if you want you can also attach user feedback to your traces. With. And I will show you all these things one by one practically in this video. But just now I wanted to show you what Lansith traces at a top level. So guys, the first thing we will do is prepare a setup and use that setup through the video. I have written some steps here to prepare the setup. We will execute these steps one by one. For example, our first step is that we first download the codes from GitHub on our machine. Have to upload. So all the codes that we will try out in this entire video, I have already written them and currently all of them are available on GH. So this is the GitHub repository. You will also find the link to this particular repository in the description of the video. You simply have to open this link and from here you have to go to the code and copy the link of this GitHub repo, after that you have to go to your command prompt and there you simply write this command: get clone and whatever URL you have copied. Had done. In my case I am downloading this particular folder on my desktop. Here comes our folder. Ok? what shall we do now? Will open this folder in VS Code. So we'll go into VS Code and go to open folder. Longest Master Class We will open this folder. Ok? Here is our folder. What should we do now? Some more things have to be done so that we will be able to run all these codes on our machine. Like first of all we have to create a virtual environment inside our project folder. so we will Go to Terminal New Terminal and here we will write Python VNV, the name of our virtual environment which is May NV. Ok? became. what shall we do now? This will activate our virtual environment. So we will write the name of our virtual environment as Bin Activate. Ok? Activated. What should we do now? First of all, some libraries have to be installed and I have included all those list of libraries in this requirements. So you simply have to write this command pip install -r requirements dottxt ok? and You can see all these libraries will be installed. Ok? So we also did step three. Now that means all these libraries are getting installed. What can we do? We can go to Langsth's website and create an account. So for that we'll go to our browser and this is the URL for length. You have to click on sign up. My account is already created. So I will login. This is your user interface of Langs. You are going to see this UI a lot throughout this video. come here Paco what to do first? Have to go to settings. And by going to Settings, first of all you have to generate an API key for yourself. So here you will see the plus button. Here you can add a description. I uploaded my personal project through Lets. Ok? And the key type you have to keep is Personal Access Token. You can set the expiry date. At present I have never created the API. Now whatever has been generated, you have to copy it. Ok? And what will we do now? In the next step we will create a dot env file. , Ok? And there we will paste some things. So basically you have to paste all these things. Again, you will find the entire content that I just copied in the description of the video. So what you have to do is you have to go back to VS Code and here you have to create a new file dot enb and here you will paste all these things. Ok? Now let me tell you what is there here. First of all you have Open AI API because we will use Open AI models. Ah, so don't worry right now. This is my butt I will remove it after shooting the video. Here you have to enter your account key. After that here you have to paste the variables of length. So the first thing you have to do is put Lang Che Lang Chen Traning B2. You have to make this true. Only then will you be able to trace your project. You have to define the end point. This is the end point. And what to do after that? You have to paste your length key. So whatever we copied, you will paste it here like this. Ok? Again don't take tension. What I'll do After shooting the video I will delete these keys from my account. And finally what do you have to do here? A project name has to be given. Here, whatever name you give to the project, a project is created on Lungsmith with the same name and all the training takes place in that particular project. Ok? So for now we have named our project Lungsmith Demo. Ok? So this was all we had to do. Whatever setup was required, we did it all. Now we're good to go. Now in the next step What should I do? We have to perform our first tracing with the help of Lag Smith. Now before we trace our first project, I want to tell you three core concepts of length. The name of the first concept is Project. The name of the second concept is Trace and the name of the third concept is Run. What are these three? Let me explain to you through an example. Suppose you are creating a very simple LLM application. Where what you are doing is that you are taking a question from the user. That question can be answered by an LLM. S is sending. LLM is replying to you. You are showing that reply to the user. Ok? Now the flow of this simple LLM application will be such that the user will give us an input which we will put inside a prompt. Whatever output comes from that prompt, we will send it to LLM. Whatever output comes from LLM, we will send it to a parser. And we will show this output of the parser again to the user. Right? So with the help of this particular example, let me explain to you these three concepts of what a project is. That is, what is trace and what is run. Ok? So first of all, the entire LLM application that you have created is called a project in length. Obviously if you have created a project then you will execute it. Right? You will execute it. Will execute multiple times. Once the first user arrives he will give his query. This entire system will run. Then another user will come and give his query. This system will run for the second time. So basically this system will execute multiple times. So every time an executive When there is a problem, we call it a trace. One single execution is called trace. As soon as I came here I asked a question, what is the capital of India. Now because of this question this entire system will run end to end. And will give me an output. So this entire execution I will call a trace. Ok? So I hope you understood the project. Trace was also understood. Now let me tell you what a run is. So our LLM application is made up of multiple components. Like it contains a prompt comp is the tenant. It has an LLM component and it has a parser component. If you pay attention, in these three components we are getting one input and one output is coming out. So the execution that happens through each component is called run. So in this particular example we have three runes. One through prompt, one through LLM and one through parser. Ok? So the very simple concept is that length refers to your entire LLM application as a project. Every time you execute that project Every execution you do is called a trace. And during every trace every component of your application is running. So we are calling that run as run. Ok? So you have to remember these three important concepts and you will see them through this video. So guys, now we have our setup ready and you know the basic concepts you should know. Now we will trace our first project over langs. Ok? So what do you have to do? The first code I have written here is simple LLA You have to open this file called 'M'. And what will we do? We will first run this particular file. Ok? Let me quickly give you a walk through of this code. It is a very simple code. Especially if you have read Lung Chain then you will find it very simple. Here we are creating a simple LLM application. Where we are asking a question from the user and we are sending that question to LLM. LLM is replying to us. And to implement this whole thing we have created a chain. chen ti Neither is it made up of things. A is so prompt. Then there is the model. After that is the parser. Ok? So the prompt we have created here with the help of prompt template. Whatever question is coming, we are sending it inside the from template and our print is getting ready. In model we are using chat open AI which is the default model and in parser we are using string output parser. Ok? Very simple code. What do you have to do now? This code has to be simply run. So, we pressed this run button and we got our out. Got the putt. Ok? The question was what is the capital of Peru? The answer is the capital of Peru is Lima. Ok? Now I know you must be feeling that nothing lungsmith related happened here and I also felt the same for the first time. But the magic of Lungsmath is that you don't need to change anything in your code here. Since you have already specified the endpoint in your environment files and have specified your API key. What will Lansith do automatically as soon as you run this code? The entire executive of this entire Will trace Shan. So if you go to Langsth UI, there you have to go to the tracking projects, then right now here you will see that you are tracing two projects, one is the default which comes automatically and look at the second, this is what you are seeing, langs demo, this is our project. Look, if you go here, here we had named our project as langsth demo, exactly the same. The same project file has been created here, now as soon as you click on this project, you will get the length of all the files. Will show all the traces. Traces means how many times you have executed your project. At present I have executed my project just once. That's why you see a single trace here with the start time. Ok? Now look here, you are getting to see so many things. What was your input into this trace? What is the capital of Peru? What was the output? Is there any error? No. What was the latency? How much time did it take for our application to handle the entire request? Apart from this, you can also see other things like how many tokens have been used and how much it cost depending on which model you are using, so there is a lot of information. Now let me show you what you can do if you want to look at your trace in a little more detail and see how each of your components executed? You can click on your trace. As you click on your trace it will give you a detailed overview of all your component runs. Ok? So you can see our Joe LLM is an application made up of three components. Prp template, chat open AI and string output parser. So these three things will constitute one run to the trace. Ok? So the pram template is a run. Chat Open AI is a run. The string output parser is a run. What can you do? By clicking on any run, you can see what input was received by that particular component and what output was generated from that component. For example, if you look at the prompt template, we had given the following in the input to the prompt template: Question. And what was the output? This is what is on your screen. Then if you click on the second component that is chat open AI your LLM then in the input we got this which was a human message and in the output we got this AI message. And what did it finally parse the string output? A. He extracted the string from the complex output that was coming from our LLM. And not only that, you also get to see details per run. Like how much time did it take for the PR template to do its job? chat o The Pun AI took 1.11 seconds to do its job. You can see here how much time it took for the string output parser and all the inferences around it. So you can see how well organized the whole thing is. First of all, you can see your projects by going to Training Projects. Inside the project you can see your traces and inside the traces you can go and see your runs. Let's do one thing. Let's run this code one more time. Ok? And this time let's have a day Farent input. So if we put India here, save and run, then again we see our output here. But the real thing will be behind the scenes here. So if I click on my project, you see two traces are visible here. And here's our most recent trace. If you click on this, now you are getting to see all the details according to your second trace, organized according to its components. Ok? So this is how length works. However, we have just taken a very simple example. Saw this whole thing. But trust me, a little later we will also take very complex examples. We will take the example of a rack system. We will take the example of an agent. We'll also see how this whole thing works in a lung graph. So I really hope you are understanding whatever I have shown you so far. And you're also feeling comfortable. So guys, now we will trace a slightly more difficult code in length. So what do you have to do? Go to your project folder and type this second file: The national chain has to be opened. Ok? Now you don't have to make many changes here. Let me give you a quick walk through of what this code does? A Honestly, you have seen this code before. This is the same code I covered in the Lung Chain playlist. What are we doing here? Creating a two step LLM application. Where in step one we are asking our LLM to generate a report on a particular topic. And then as soon as that report is being generated, we can also make a five point summary from the same report. Are generating. Ok? So this is the entire flow. The user is giving you the topic. You are making your first print with it. This is to generate a detailed report on this topic. We are sending that particular proposal to our model at Edge in LLM. Whatever response the LLM has, we are extracting it with the help of parser. And we are sending the extracted response to text 2, which is this. Generate a five point summary from the following text. And instead of text our extracted report appears . Then we are sending the second prompt back to the model from which we are getting the response and from that response we are extracting the string with the help of the parser, a very simple sequential flow. Ok? Now we will run this particular code and trace its length. Ok? But before executing this code I'd like to make a few changes. Ok? So the first change is that if I run this code at this point, then its tracing will be in exactly the same project that we have created so far. I had made 'Which is the longest' demo. Now ideally what you should do is that whenever you are working on new projects, you should create separate projects for them above the length. Ok? Like this file which is currently the second one. This is a different LLM application in itself. So this derives a separate project on length. Ok? So what do we do? We will create a separate project first. Now what are the methods of creating a project? One way is to go here and make changes. Enter the name of the new project here , Let me now tell you another way. Where you can set the project name from inside your code also. You don't have to do anything for this. You have to first import the os module and then set the os.environment variable. And what you will do here will be lunching project. Exactly what you had set in the environment file. And here we are naming this project Sequential App. Ok? Or Sequential LLM App. Now what will happen is that first it will check from the env file that the project name is Or is it but then after it comes in the code, this project name will be visible, then this particular project name will override the previous one, okay, so what you can do in this way, you can set the project name inside your code, both the methods, both options are available to you, okay, so this is the first change I had to make, the second change I had to do is that I want to explicitly specify the model here. GPT4O Mini. Ok? And I also want to set the temperature value. From lates. Ok? In fact what we can do is We can make two models. The first will be Model One and the second will be Model Two. And the model two will be GPT4O. And I kept its temperature value five. Ok? Here Model One will come for report generation for the first task and Model Two will come for summarization. Ok? This is the second change. The third change I want to make is that I want to lock some meta data and some tags along with this particular trace of mine. Ok? I showed you in the previous example that you will find some tags there. Some meta data was also visible. Now let me show you how to add your desired tags and meta data. Ok? So what do you have to do for that? Where you are finally invoking your chain, you have to form a dictionary by calling a config. And inside that dictionary you can add multiple things. Like you can add tags. So suppose our tag is A LLM App Report Generation Summarization, you can add tags in this way. Ok? And at the same time if you th You can also add some meta data here. Ok? Like meta data will be a dictionary. Here you wrote model one is gpt four o many model one temperature is 7 a and you can add other things like the parser that you are using is string output parser. Ok? Things Like That You Can Add. And then what do you have to do finally? When you are calling invoke, set the value of the config there which you just created. And that's it. In this way you can set the tags and meta data of your choice. Inside our trace. Ok? So I'm saving this and I'm running this. What changes will take place? First you will see a new project. This entire thing will be traceable in that new project. After that these tags will also be visible to you and this meta data will also be visible to you. So let's run this code. And you can see this is the output that we're getting. Let's do one thing. Let's go on the length. And you can see now we have two training projects. There's a longer demo that we saw a while back and a t Sequential LLA Map. If you click on it, then you can see that currently there is a trace, its name is Runnable Sequence, Input is this, Output is this, if you go a little further, you will also start seeing tags, see this, Report Generation Summarization LLM App, OK, in the meta data you can see that Model One is this Model Temperature is this Parcel String Output Parser and it also has some meta data of its own so one It works, click it once and you can see the whole thing properly according to the runs or Is ganized. First came Pram template one. In this we gave Unemployment in India as input and this is the output generated a detailed report on Unemployment in India. Then came the Chart Open AI which is the GPT Four Ohm Mini. Look, there is a label here. Ok? And it said Generate a detailed report on unemployment in India. This is your entire output. This is the report. Ok? Then we went to the string output parser. Then we went to the prom template. We said, we gave this input and the output was this. janare Make a five point summary from the following text. Ok? The second model is gpt4o and string output parser. Ok? So you can see the whole thing. And here you can see your tags. Ok? There is one more thing you have to notice here. There are tags according to runs also. Like if you go to the template template, the first one there you will see this is step one in the sequence. If you go to Chat Open AI, here you will see step two in sequence. Here if you go to step five in sequence. Ok? if you If you want to see meta data then you are currently on the run. You can also go to meta data from here. Here you will start seeing your meta data. Ok? Whatever meta data we have set here will actually be visible to us at this level, at the trace level. Ok? So you can see parser is string output parser model one temperature is this and you'll see meta data by run as well. Like this particular chat open eye instance, the model in it is GPT 4O Mini. If you go here the model is GPT4O. so my own too There is intelligence. He keeps locking some meta data at his level also. Ok? I would like to show you one more thing. Like the name that is coming here, you can change this runnable sequence also. Ok? You can put anything of your choice here. This is auto generated. What do you simply have to do? You have to go to config again and here you have to set the run name. Anything sequential chain. Ok? And now you will run it as soon as possible. Ok? So comma will come here. Now let's run it. again us Our output is visible. Let's go back once. Now look, the name which you had decided has appeared here. Rather than give an auto generated name. Ok? Everything else will be exactly the same. Here also you will see all your components organized in the same manner. You will get to see everyone's latency, token usage and whatever is the input output, you will get to see everything at one place. Ok? So what new have we learned in this particular example? How do you setup a project name from within code? How to make your own tags , You can set your own meta data. How can you set your own run name? Ok? I hope things are finding easy for you so far. Now we'll turn the difficulty up a little bit and trace a rag application. Now before practically tracing the Rag application I want to discuss one thing with you. I want to discuss with you why integration of Length with any Rag application is a good idea. So what is rag application? Rab Rag application is one such application Where you give your LLM a query and also provide some additional context in order to help the LLM answer the question. Right? You want to answer questions on your personal data. So you sent a question to LLM. But at the same time, you also extract the relevant chunk of information from your document and give it to LLM. So LLM also got questions. Relevant chunk of these was also found. By combining those two it gives you the final answer. That's what you do in rags. But this idea sounds very strange. Seems simple theoretically. But when you implement it practically and you put it in the production setup, you will see that most of the people complain that the quality of answering of their rag chatbot is not that good. Meaning that the answers that are coming out from their Rag Chatbot are that they are not very satisfied with the response. And this happens because two types of errors can occur in Rat Chat Watt. The first error is retriever errors. Retriever errors mean that you sent a query. now you You have to retrieve relevant docs related to this question from your knowledge source. Whose work is this? Of the retriever. But the retriever could not bring the correct chunks of information according to this question. So this is called retriever error. Due to this also the response quality of rack chart watt is not good. Second is generator errors. Even though your retriever brought good chunks of information and relevant chunks of information but your LLM is hallucinating and the final answer you are getting is not good. now from production What is the problem with this, that if the response of the chatbot is bad then you cannot deduce why the answer is bad? Was it the retriever's fault or the generator's fault? Since you are only getting the final response, there is nothing intermediate, you will not be able to deduce whether the retriever or your generator is working wrong and this is a big problem. And who can solve this problem? Langsmath. Why? Because when you trace a rogue chatbot with the help of a Lansith application, then Langsith What does it do? Traces every intermediate step. It traces what question the user asked. It traces what documents the retriever fetched. It traces what the final prep was by combining the question and context and it also traces what the final LLM's response was, so since you can go and see every intermediate step, you can easily get an idea whether the retriever has failed or the generator has failed, where the mistake is, it is very easy to identify. Knowledge is gained. Ok? So this is exactly what I am going to show you now, practically. And for this I have prepared a code. So what do you have to do? You have to open this third code on your machine. And once I give you a little walk through of that code. Here we have created a very simple rag application. What does that do? There is a PDF lying in our project directory itself. And this PDF is the PDF of the book which is basically Introduction to Statistical Learning. Basically a book on machine learning. . Ok? What will we do? We will ask questions related to this book to our LLM and our LLM will be able to answer. Ok? Like we will ask the question, who is the author of this book? So our LLM will be able to tell us. Or we will ask what is the summary of chapter number six? So our LLM will be able to tell us. Ok? So this is a proper rag application. Let me explain the flow to you once. Again, if you have seen the rag video of my lung chain playlist, then this code is very similar to that video. Ok? b Almost the same concepts have been used. Let me give you the flow once. Then we run it once and see. So what did we do? All the imports have been taken here. We have done payload.envy here. Here we have given the path of our PDF. If you have any other PDF then you can rename it here. Now there are three steps here. What are we doing in this step? We are loading our PDF with the help of Pi PDF Loader. Ok? After that, what are we doing in the second step? We're chunking. Ok? So for chunking we have taken the chunk size as 1000. Chunk overlap is kept at 150. After that, what are we doing in this step? We are performing embeddings and creating a retriever. Ok? So this is our retriever. What are we doing here? We Are Creating Our Prt. Ok? And what have we written in the prompt? Answer only from the provided context. If Not Found Says You Don't Know. After that here we have defined our LLM. We have written this particular function. e The way it works is very simple that when the retriever returns chunks of information, they are document objects. So we are merging the text of all those document objects and creating one big text. Ok? This is the work of this function. Now the chain that we have created in the process of building this application looks like this. I'll show it to you. So basically there are two parts in this chain. One part is this parallel chain. Ok? Where there are two paths. Question enters one of the paths and only question is found. Is. Look at this parallel chain, the question is entering into this particular part. And because of the runnable path through, the question is coming out at this place. And the question is entering in the second part. Going to the retriever. The retriever is retrieving the context and merging all that context. So look at this ination going to the retriever. From there the format is going to docs. Format Docs creates a single text by merging all the documents. So basically these are the outputs of the chain. You will get two things. One you will get your question which was the original question and one you will get the context. This chain has two outputs. Now we are sending both these outputs here to the next chain. And the next chain is our This is the string output parser from PrP Prt to LLM LLM. In this prompt we sent the question and also sent the context. Look at this, you will see it in the code. If you look in the text, you will see that the question is being given here and the context is also being given. Ok? From that we are going to LLM Are. From LLM we are moving to the parser. So this is the flow of our application. I had also created and shown you this exact flow in our Landchain playlist. Ok? Now let's do one thing. We run this code. Before running, I just want to make a small change and that change is that I want to create a project name here. So i wood light os dot environment. Here we will write Langchain Unders Project and we will name this project Rag Chat Box. Ok? So that it is inside a separate project There should be login, there should be training. Ok? Now let's do one thing. Let's run it once. It is taking a little time because we are loading the document. Then splitting it. Then performing embedding on top of that. And after this complete process is done, we will ask questions and we will get answers. Ok? So the first run in rag is slow. Ok? Now I can ask questions. I asked who is the author of this book? And look we got the answer. Garrett James Trevor Hey Hasty Robert Tribishani Whatever it is. Now the real interesting thing you will see here is in the length. First of all, you see that a new project has been created in your tracing projects, Rat Chatbot and if you click on it, then this is your first trace. Ok? Go up this trace once. And Now You Can See How Beautifully Everything We've Tracked. Ok? So the runnable sequence at the top is we have our entire rag application. Now if you look inside it, you will see this entire chain. Let us show you the entire chain that we have made. Will give. Ok? So at the top is a runnable parallel. Now there are two things in Runnable Parallel. One is yours where you are sending questions. Who is the author of the book and you are getting a chance of ination. Ok? Basically this part this part is fine and if you click on the runnable pass through then this is the second part of the parallel chain where the question you are sending is being received as it is, fine and if you click on this then what you have given in the input is the author of the book. In the output you got two things, a context and Second you got the question as it is which we had also discussed here that at this point you will get two things, one you will get the question and one you will get the context. Now these two things we are going to send in the print. So if you come here to the chat prompt template, you will see two things in the input. With the help of context and question and these two things, we are creating a prompt form which contains the system message. Answer only from the provided context if not found then you don't know. And we have provided these two things. This is the question and this is the context. So in this step we have created our print template. Now he has the same prize for his LLM. LLM is turning around and generating an answer. We are displaying the same answer in a slightly better way with the help of string output parser. Ok? Now if you look at this entire process, you will find everything being tracked very well. How much time is each component taking, what is the token usage? This entire creation has come to you very beautifully. Ok? There is only Mr. One Problem. Actually there are two problems. I'll Tell You What These Problems Are. The first problem is that Lungsmith is not actually tracing our entire Rag application. It is just tracing this part where we have executed the chain. The parallel one as well as the normal one. But this is the portion where we are loading the PDF, chunking it and embedding it. This is also an important part of our rag application. It is not being traced. that e Why if you go here, you will not find any mention of the loading of the PDF or its chunking or its embedding. We are only tracing whatever happened after that process. And this is because by default your langsmith only traces the lang chain runnables. Meaning wherever it is being invoked, basically it automatically does length tracing wherever the invoke function is being implemented. Since here above while loading the PDF Or if we did not use any runnables in the process of chunking or embedding, then by default the length is not tracking there. So this is the first problem that our entire Rag application is not being traced. Ok? What should happen ideally? There should be complete end to end training. I would also like to know how much time it took for the PDF to load. I would also like to know how much time was taken for chunking. I would also like to know how much time was taken for embedding. Which model is used in embedding. all this is me I should know. But currently this application is being partially traced. This is problem number one. Problem number two is a logical problem. And let me show you what it is. The problem is that the way our Rag application is currently built, there is a big flaw in it. The flaw is that every time you run this application, it will take you more time to find the answer. And the reason is that every time you are running the application each time the application is loading the PDF then chunking it and then generating What should ideally be the embeddings? PDF should be loaded in the first run, chunking should be done, embeddings should be created and those embeddings should be stored somewhere so that in each subsequent run, we do not need to load the PDF again, chunk it, do all this. We directly go to that particular database and from there get the answers from its embeddings. Let me show you. What am I doing? I run this application again. You see how much time it is taking. It is taking so much time because Second time again we are loading the same PDF. Again chunking it and then embedding it and then question answering will happen. So again it is going to take the same amount of time. I will wait for the process to get completed. Ok? Now I Can Ask Questions. So let's ask what is the full form of GLM? Generalized Models. Ok? This is our answer. And training also took place here. But again the problem is that every time we are doing the same steps which is not logical. this should not happen Want a. Ok? So these are the two big problems in our Rag application at the moment. And what will we do now? Will solve both these problems. First I will make sure that the entire application is traceable and then I will solve this problem of latency as well. Ok? So guys, first we will focus on solving the first problem. Ok? Where we make sure that our entire application is traced including the parts where we are loading and chunking our PDF. Ok? So I wrote code for this also Is kept. What do you have to do? This is to open the file of Rag V2. Ok? And let me quickly tell you what changes I have made in it. First of all, here also you have to keep the project same. Because right now we are training in the Rack Chartbot project only. The main difference is that we are calling traceable from the langsmith module. Ok? And what can you do with the help of this traceable? You can form decorators. Ok? What will these decorators do now? I tell you. Before that we have a big f In your code. We had all these components where we were loading the PDF or splitting or performing embedding. I converted all these pieces of code into functions, like I created a function load PDF. If you give it the path of the PDF, it will load the PDF and give you it. Similarly, I created a function to split the documents where If you provide your documents, if you provide chunk size, if you provide chunk overlap, then this will be your doc. Will split the elements and give it. Similarly by saying build vector store I created another function to perform embedding and generating a retriever. Ok? And what did I do in the end? Created a setup pipeline function inside which I am doing all these three things. So inside this function first I am calling load PDF. To load PDF. Then I am calling Split Documents. To split the documents and call the build vector store to build our retriever. and here But finally I am getting my retriever in the output. Ok? Now what's the real fun is that if I want I can have these functions traced in these lengths. All you have to do is call this traceable decorator on the function you want to trace and provide a name in which run name you want to show that particular function as a component. Ok? So what did I do? I put traceable on all the four functions and Gave everyone a name. You will now see these exact names in the Langs UI. Ok? So this is the first change. The second change is a very small change. What have I done? Lastly here also where I am calling chain.invoke I have passed a config variable and I have given a run name PDF Rag Query. Even if I don't want this, it won't make any difference. A, I just gave this so that the runnable sequence that was currently visible there was visible. The runnable sequence that appears Instead you will see PDF rag query. That's the only change. So the big change is that we're using traceable from Lansith. And what can you do with the help of traceable? You can trace any normal python function. Even if there is nothing runnable inside it. Ok? So I guess you understood the whole thing. Now what will be the benefit of making this complete change that our entire application will be traced. Where we are loading the entire PDF, that part and where we are performing rags. Part also. Ok? So let me run and show you this application once. So again since we are running for the first time it will take time. This problem has not been resolved yet. So first the PDF is being loaded, split is being done, embedding is being performed. After all this is done, we will be able to ask questions and queries. So here now I can ask what is linear regression? And here I got my answer. So now if I go back and I go to tracing, go to rack chart pot. Now here you will find one thing interesting. Will be visible. You will see that two separate traces have been created. are you watching? You can see two traces. There is one called Setup Pipeline because loading, chunking and embedding is done inside it. And you will see a PDF Rag Query Which is this one where you are running the Rag application. This one. So I do one thing, I show you both. Ok? First let me show you what's going on in the setup pipeline. So if I click on setup pipeline, you will see that the trace with setup pipeline There are three runas inside it. One is Load PDF, one is Split Documents, one is Build Vector Store. Exactly all three functions have been traced. Look at this, this and this. Ok? And you can track all three independently. Like if you click on Load PDF, what are you getting in the input? This path is available. And what are you getting in the output? Set of documents pages on one document. There are 441 pages in this book. You have 441 document objects. Ok? After that if you split document So here, what are you getting as input? Chunk Overlap and Chunk Size. Ok? And on that basis you are performing splitting. And what are you getting in the Last Build vector store? You are getting all these documents in input 441 documents. And what are you doing? By performing embedding on them you are getting a retriever object. Look at this. Ok? So I hope you understand that the setup pipeline is being traced and how it is working. At the same time you can also see that How much latency was incurred? It took 15 seconds to load the PDF. It didn't take much time to split but it took time to create the vector store. Ok? Now let's do one thing. Let's go back to the next one. In pdf rack query file. Now if you look here, you will see exactly the same thing which I had shown you previously. Again that runnable is running parallel which has two paths inside it. One question is being asked. One is passing the query to the retriever and you are getting the context. Ok? Apart from that then chat pro The template has arrived. After that Chat Open AI came and then String Output Parser came. So I can tell you that our entire rag application is being traced. The only problem now is that it is being traced in two different parts. Whereas this is a single application. What should have ideally happened? Ideally, it should have been something like this, we should have our Rag application at the very top and then inside that there should be a setup pipeline and inside that here there should be a part called pay a Rag query. Now inside the setup pipeline There should have been chunking embedding when loading the document. There should have been a parallel and normal chain here. I wanted this hierarchy. But unfortunately right now our application is working as if it is a combination of two separate applications. Which is not a good idea. So next what we will do is that we will modify our code in such a way that a trace will be created at the top level and inside it will be the setup work and your rack query work will also be done. Ok? So we will make this change next. Just wanted to give you a side note Am. So, one benefit of adding this traceable is that you are able to trace your normal python functions also. But it has another advantage. If you want, you can also assign specific tags and meta data to your components. For example, suppose this is the particular component where we are loading the data. So if I want I can add some tags like this. A tags is equal to a list and then I added the PDF or the loader. Ok? I know, it's not very meaningful yet. But you get the idea. Similarly if you want here you can attach meta data in the form of a dictionary. Here we can lock the name of the loader we are using from Lets. Pie PDF Loader. Ok? So this will be logged here specific to this component. Similarly from Lets where we are creating a vector store. Here we can attach a tag. Similarly to vector stores of embeddings we can attach meta data. And in this we can write embedding model, the name of the embedding model we are using is a text embedding three small. th ok? Then you can also attach how many dimensions your embedding will have. You can do all these things. Ok? So basically, you can add your own specific tags and meta data to all the traceable decorators you have created. Ok? To do more rich training. Ok? Let's run it once and see how the output is coming. So if I run this here on Let's I asked what is logistic regression and ran it. After asking the question again it will take some time because The entire pipeline is getting triggered. Then the query is being performed. And you can see we got our answer. Let's go back once. This is our run. We can see the complete hierarchy. Now in this we go to load PDF. So here you can see PDF Loader. These are the tags we added. Similarly in the meta data you should see the value of Loader is Pi PDF Loader. Ok? Similarly, if you go to the Build Vector Store step, you can also see the embedding model here. Ok? and if you If you go to Run, here you will see all these tags: Embedding Vector Store. So, according to your run, you can also enter tags according to your components. You can enter meta data. And the best part is now it becomes searchable on its basis. Ok? You grab this meta data and you can click on it to find out which traces have used this particular embedding model. This is the main functionality for searching. If you have a lot of traces, that's where you can capture meta data and tags like this. You can search. Ok? So this is beneficial. I hope this whole thing became clear to you. what shall we do now? The second problem of our code is that every time we are asking a query, every time it is taking more time, we will solve that problem in around 202 seconds. Ok? Now I have written code to solve this latency problem also. And you can access this code if you open this file. Rag Unders v4 Now I'll Be Honest. This code is a bit difficult. So, bring this by line It is not possible for me to explain this. Because in this particular video our end goal is not to write the best code of rack. Rather the working of length has to be understood. Ok? So what we'll do is I'll just give you a basic one of what I changed in this code and then I'll run it and show you this code. Ok? So the basic change I have made is that the vector database we are using here is Phys. Ok? And I have written this code in such a way that when you run this code for the first time, you will see an You will build x in your project directory. Those indexes will basically be the embeddings of your document and in each subsequent run you will first check whether the index is already present or not. If it is already present then what you will do is you will use the existing index to get the answers. But if the index is not found then we will build it again. Ok? So this particular code is here. I would recommend that you go and check it once you download the code. Meanwhile What I'll Do Is I'll Do You a Baa Let me show you this code by running it. Means if you look here currently no index exists. Which means we are running this code for the first time. So here suppose we asked the question 'Who is the author?' Now it is the first time so it will take time. Ok? Now the complete setup will be done. The file will be loaded, chunking will happen and after that embedding will happen, index will be created. So it will take a little time and then I will see my answer. And you can see I got my answer. If I take you one time here in Langsyth, I will give you The most recent run that will be visible is the one that took around 30 seconds. Ok? If you click on it, nothing different will be seen. Here you will again see that your entire application is running in two parts. One is the setup pipeline where we are calling the build index. Ok? Build index means if it is run for the first time then the index is being created and what is happening inside it? The same three steps load PDF, split documents, build vector store and then your query handling page. Here is the complete code. Ok? The real fun will come when you run this code again. So if I run it again and this time I ask what is the full form of GLM? So see, he immediately answered. The full form of GLM is Generalized Linear Model. If we go back and look at the most recent run, what's the latency? 1.65 seconds. Why did this happen? Let me show you. If you go inside, again it is a two step process. But this time focus on the first step. What is the first step? Load Index. build in There is no dex. So if you click on it, you will see that directly in the output you can see the index which we had stored in our project folder and you can access it from here. Look at these dot indices, our entire embedding is fixed here. So what will happen in each subsequent run? Rather than creating a new index we are using this index. Because of this a lot of time is being saved. One more if we try running. Uh What's This Book All About? And you can see us coming Getting our answer. And here's the most recent one. Still, it took a little more time. May be because a little more of your documents may be being retrieved from behind. So that's why it's taking a little time. But again just 4.42 seconds doesn't seem like 202 seconds. Ok? Now a question might be coming in your mind that when will it be built and when will it be reused. Ok? As it is being loaded here, it means it is being reused. So look here I have written the conditions. What will happen in these conditions is that our index will be rebuilt. Such as If you are running your code for the first time and your index is not available then your build will happen. Seconds if there are any changes in the content of your PDF. Like if I bring another PDF here and if I update its path here, then as soon as I run my code, the index will be built again obviously. Ok? Even if some meta data of your PDF changes, the indexes will be recreated. Ok? If your size changes or the last modification time changes Even if it happens, the indexes will be created again. Will not be used. Fourth, if you change your chunking parameters, which basically means if you change the value of chunk size or the value of chunk overlap, then the indexes will be recreated again and it will take time. Ok? And lastly if you use any other embedding model. Like right now we have used text embedding three small. Suppose you use something else, your index will be created again. So these are the situations in which we will get a new index and it will be Some time. But apart from this, every time you will answer with the help of existing index. Means your application will give fast output. Ok? And this is what you do. When you push the Rag application to production, you will obviously make sure that you maintain an index and from there you can repeatedly extract the answers, rather than doing the same thing at the same time. Ok? So I hope you have understood after this entire detailed discussion what is a rag? What are the challenges of running Rag on production? Wool How A Lung Smith Can Help You Solve Challenges. And I really hope you got some clarity around the rack. Ok? what shall we do now? We'll move a notch to a slightly more difficult topic. Where we will run the code of an agent and apply Lansith on it and see what benefit we are getting. So let's guys run this code once and see how Langsmuth is tracing this whole thing. So you can see here that our agent work has started and we are getting this response. Is. Dhadak Is Set To Hit Theaters On August 26, 2025 Which Is Basically Wrong If I Know Correctly This Movie Is Already Released. In any case, let us once see how the whole thing has been traced. So a new project has been created, here is our only trace inside it and look at this, you can see the components in quite detailed. If you collapse it all, it's just three main components at a high level. What is happening in the first component is that the scratchpad of the agent is being initiated. In the beginning there is nothing there. and then And what we're doing is we're creating a prompt which is the prompt of the React agent. We are just stating our question there. And a lot is written in our prompt. Answer the following questions as best you can. You have the access to following tools. Here are both of our tools. The format has been told to be Thought Action Observation and here we have told our question. Ok? Now we are sending this prompt to our LLM. Ok? So our LLM will look at this proposal and decide what our action will be. Should be to go and search on duck duck go and action should remain input on Dhadak to release date. Ok? And what will we do with this? Will go and add it to our scratchpad. Ok? What will happen after that? We'll do a duck duck go search. The search input will be Dhadak to release date. We are getting this whole thing through search. what shall we do now? Again we will do the same thought action observation pattern and what will we do here? First of all, we will add this entire thing to the agent's scratchpad. Ok? Look, this whole thing is getting added. i shu Use Duck Duck Go Search Observations Here. Ok? So, we have added the entire thought action observation thing in Scratchpad. What will we do after that? Will modify your prompt again. And this time we will also add the entire observation in the prompt last. Ok? Basically, we are bringing things from the scratch pad of the agent and adding them to the prompt. And now we will send this new certificate to LLM. And LLM will see this whole thing and say I now know the release date of Dhadak 2. final answer Is this. And I will finally output this thing that the output should be this. Ok? This is the output. So this is how the react agent works. Because of length you are able to see each and every step and how the output of the previous thing is serving as input for the next thing. How the entire Thought Action Observation pattern is implemented. This whole thing is visible to you. Can do one more thing. Let's try out one more query. So we are using this query. What is the current temperature of Gurgaon? in this Our LLM will force us to use the second tool which is weather tool. Let's save. Let's run it. And you can see the current temperature of Gurgaon is 30° Celsius. So if I go back, this is our second trace and it's the same setup again. Ok? So the first scratch pad was initiated. After that we created the PRAM template. This time we put the question in the prom template, What is the current temperature of Gurgaon? So how did our LLM resonate? He said I should use the get weather data function to find out And the current temperature of Gurgaon. The action is to call this function and the input of the action is the name of Gurgaon City. Ok? And we added this to our scratch part. Then we called this tool. In input we sent Gurgaon. Since this API is being hit, many types of data have been returned from there. What is humidity? What is wind speed? Everything is getting recorded. Ok? Then we went back and added all these things to our scratchpad again. Ok? Everything is being added. Ok? Oh look here Is placed. This whole thing has arrived. Again we pasted all the content of Scratchpad into the Protm template. We pasted all this content. Now we sent this content to LLM. LLM looked at it and told that the final temperature should be 30° Celsius. Ok? So you can see how much transparency is coming in the working process of the agent. Even though it is still working autonomously. But because of Lang Smith you are able to observe each and every intermediate state. Ok? So something is going wrong. you d Needs bugging. Somewhere your cost is going very high. You can go and check all those things very easily. You can see the total amount of your tokens spent. Simply by going to the top view you can check how much token you are spending. How much money is it costing you? What is latency? Landsmith LA is showing you all these things in one go. Ok? Now let's do one thing. Let's send a slightly more complex query. Ok? And that query is this next one. So what are we doing in this particular query We are asking first that you have to identify the birth place of Kalpana Chawla. And then give its current temperature. So basically we're forcing the agent to use two different tools. One is search, second is weather tool. Ok? So let's do one thing. Let's run it once. And he picked Gurgaon which is wrong. Actually it should be Karnal. A. I do one thing. I run it again. Because when I ran a while ago, he picked it correctly. Now it is picking up Gurgaon. My bad. I pasted the question Didn't even do it. Let's do one thing and paste it. Copy Paste Save Run and See He picked Karnal and then showed the temperature of Karnal. So let's do one thing. Let's see what's in the tracing. Let's go to the last one. This time you will see a slightly longer trace. You can see this time you are using an additional tool. So let's see step by step. In the first one, you have got the input. This is your log. First we need to search for the birth place of Kalpana Chawla and then get the current temperature of The City. This is the action. This is the action input. Ok? You went to Doug Duck Go. You have imagined Kalpana Chawla Birth Place City. Now details of many different people named Kalpana are coming here. You entered all these details in Scratchpad. Ok? Look here, now this is your log. Now That We Know the Birth Place City of Kalpana Chawla is Karnal. We can get the current temperature of Karnal. So what is the action now? Get Weather Data. And what became the action input? Karnal. So now we called get weather data. Sent to Karnal for input. And this is Got a lot of weather data from API. Now we went back. All these intermediate steps are here. And lastly this is the lock. The current temperature in Karnal is 27° Celsius. And it was typed. Now Agent Finish. Here is the final answer. Ok? So this is how a lsmith traces an agentic application. However, what we did right now was a very basic level agent. But you can imagine, we have discussed different agents in the past. As I told you, if you create an agent application for a hiring platform, then that Tane can conduct the process of hiring in a complex manner. Imagine that kind of agent and how much complexity is there in it and how difficult it is to debug if something goes wrong with it. In that kind of situation, this tool can be a very very helpful thing. Ok? So from now on, if you ever build agentic applications, please make sure you integrate length into it. In fact, we are also going to create agents in our currently playing Langraft playlist. so there i will make Make sure I integrate the length and show you all this stuff. Ok? So I hope by now you have understood things. Whatever we discussed till now, first we created a simple LLM application. Then we had a lot of discussion over the rack. Then we discussed a lot about agents. But the entire discussion was around Lang Chen Library. Whatever code we wrote was written in Lang Chain. what shall we do now? We will move towards Lang graph. Lang Graph Is Equivalent May Be More Than Morant Than Lang Chain. So how does Langsmith integration happen there? How does Langsmith work there? is in conjunction with Lang graph. We will see this next and that too will be a very important section. So guys, now let's talk about integration of Lang graph and Langsmith. If you do not already know about LANGRAPH, then quickly if I tell you, LANGRAPH is basically this library where you create LLM applications. And what is special about Langraff? That they can manage LLM applications like a work flow. It treats and you can represent any type of work flow in the form of a graph inside Lung Graph. Ok? And after that there is a lot of technicality. There is a state feature and each node represents a task. Two nodes are connected by an edge which tells you which task is executed next after one task is executed. You can do all this in Lang Graph. Now the problem with Lung Graph is that when you want to create even a slightly complex work flow, If you look at this graph, it becomes very complex and difficult. Especially if there is any problem then debugging it is very hectic. Because the structure of the graph is very complex. And this is where Langsith helps you. Lang Smith has a very strong integration with Langgraph. Because both the products are developed by the same team. And how does Langith work? What can you do in case of Lang Graph? Complete graph execution. The graph you created is executed from top to bottom. You can store that entire execution as a trace in Lang Smith. Ok? This is concept number one. Concept number two is that each node becomes a run inside the trace. Just now we saw when we worked with lung chain that multiple components are formed inside. If in your chain A is a prompt, A is a LLM and A is a parser. So you get three runas. Three components are made. Ok? So similarly here if you have a graph with let's say five nodes. So for each node there will be one component and Don't enter your Lensith UI. Ok? So this is a very important concept and you can visualize which path was taken during the execution. Ok? And if there is branching happening somewhere in your work flow or graph, or conditional parallels or subgraphs are being formed, then Lang Smith captures that too. So basically, no matter how complex a graph you have created, you can track it very easily with the help of Langmith in Lang Lang Graph. You just have to remember two concepts. The first concept as soon as you When you execute Raf, the entire execution becomes one trace in length. This is one concept. Second concept is each node in length graph becomes one run in length. Ok? So what do we do now? Let us understand how this whole thing works through an example and the LLM application I have chosen for the example is an LLM application which you might have seen in our Lang Graph playlist a few days ago. Basically this is an LLM application where you are providing an object as input to our graph and We are judging that ass on the basis of three parameters. So this is the ass. And we are judging it on the basis of language, on the basis of analysis and on the basis of clarity. And finally we are generating one score each on all three bases. And then on all three bases we are generating an overview or overall summary or feedback and generating a final score. Ok? I'm Pretty Sure If you've seen our Langraft playlist you'll have an idea. Ok? I'm not going to explain the code because if you have a problem If you don't know the graph then in any case you will not understand the code and if you have learned the graph then I am pretty sure it is a very simple code for you because you can see. There are four notes here. In fact let me show you the graphical structure. This is the structure of our graph. Ok? Our graph starts from here. Basically here you are giving your edge input like this. He is going to these three places like this. Ok? To evaluate analysis, to evaluate language, to evaluate thought process. Here But we are also getting a feedback and a score. Here also we are getting a feedback and a score. Here also we are getting a feedback and a score. And then all three of these feedbacks are going to this final evaluation which is giving us an overall feedback. And these three scores are also going here which we are averaging. This is the work flow that we are going to create. Ok? So the code is very simple. Here we created all the nodes. Here we created all the edges. For each node. We have created functions up here. This is the function to create evaluate language. This is for evaluated analysis. This is for evaluate thought and this is for final evaluation. Ok? And you will notice one more thing. Even though Lang Smith automatically tracks all the nodes, I have done an extra thing here. I have also traced the function of each node. So we are also tracing the node and the functions that are executing inside the node. Ok? Although this step Is optional. If you want, you can remove this particular traceable line. There won't be that much problem. But I want to do tracing at function level also. Am. That's why I've added these traceable decorators. Ok? In any case I guess you understood what Roughly Flow is? Here we are providing an ass. Which is SA to. This is what I showed you above. This is SA too. And here we have given a config. The config has multiple tags and meta data etc. You can remove this to simplify the code. For. But you get the idea. Ok? It's a simple Lung Graph work flow where we have integrated Lung Smith. Here we have given the name of a project. Now let's run it once and see what the output is. So since we are doing three-four LLM calls. It is taking a little more time here. And look here is our output. Ok? So first of all the feedback about language is coming. After that the feedback of analysis is coming. After that the feedback of clarity is coming. Then overall feedback is coming. Individual S Courses are visible. Got four marks each in all three. So the average score is also four. Ok? Now you may not be able to understand anything special here. So once let's go to Langsth dashboard. Look there, a new project of ours has been created by saying lung graph as checker and there we have created a new trace Evaluate UPSC, why did this name come like this, because here we have given a name, if you go to the very bottom, here we have told the run name, that is why, okay, if you click on it, now you will get the complete graph. It will be understood step by step that the execution has taken place. Ok? What do I do? First I will collapse so you can understand that well. Ok? So see what is happening, these three nodes are executing parallelly and then the output of these three nodes is going to our final node that is the final evaluation. So now what I do is I show you the execution of all the nodes one by one. Ok? So this is our first node which is visible to you here as the first run. Now this So if you go inside, the first thing you will see is that there is a function evaluate analysis function. Ok? I told you a moment ago that we're not just tracking nodes. We are also tracking the functions that are inside the node. Ok? That's why you see all these function names. Ok? So what's happening? Suppose if you go to this function, then what is this function getting as input and what is its output? You can see both these things. Like in the input you Complete status is available. You will remember that whenever you create a function of any node in Lung Graph, you pass its state as input. So here you are getting the same state and this is your output. Ok? How did this output come about? If you want to know this then you can go here. A There is a runnable sequence here. Ok? Now in the runnable sequence, you are getting this in the input and in the output, you are getting the output following a schema that the value of feedback is so much, the value of score is so much. Why did this happen now? Because you have an LLM to whom you sent your prt and sent your es. And along with this particular LLM you sent an evaluation schema. Where you are saying that you should tell me exactly two things. First is the value of feedback, second is the value of score. Ok? So the particular LLM we are using here is a structured LLM. And how was this made? If you go up a little bit, you'll see that we created a normal model and on top of that with a structured output function. Called no. Ok? So now this will generate structured output and we have attached a schema to it. The evaluation schema that you see here. So what will this particular LLM call? Will give output only by following this schema. Ok? And to extract that output, there is a runnable lambda which is taking this response of the LLM and arranging it according to your output schema. Ok? So this is how our first node is working. Ok? Your second node also works in exactly the same way. Will do. Here also is the function of your node which is getting the state edge input. Here also there is a runnable sequence and this is the output of the runnable sequence. Such output is because you have a structured LLM which is giving output by following this schema. Same with the third node. Also in the third node you have a function which is getting everything in the state. This is a structured model which is giving output by following the schema and after all this is done, the output of all three nodes is going to the final evaluation where It has its own function, it is getting the state in the input. All these things have arrived in the state. Analysis Feedback, Clarity Feedback, Language Feedback, All the Individuals Course. And based on this what is the final function doing? It is generating two things. The Overall Feedback Summary and the Average Score. Ok? Now where is this overall feedback coming from? It is coming from this particular LLM call where we have written this prompt and sent that I will give you three types of feedback. You generate an overall feedback on that basis. now this which This is LLM, it is a normal LLM. If you look at this, you will see that the model we are using in the last function is a simple one. This is not a structured model. Will not give structured output. That's why you can't see all this here. Runnable sequences, runnable lambdas, all this you get to see when you have an LLM with structured output. Here it is very very simple. Ok? So this is what a This is how length works in the case of Lang graph. No Thing fancy. This whole thing is based on very simple principles. When you execute the graph of Lang Graph, the entire execution will be converted into a trace and the execution of each node will become a run here and then you can give a name to each run, give a name to its function, associate its tag meta data with it, plus you can go to the node level and see how much time it took to execute a node, like here I see. I can estimate that the Evaluate Analysis node took 3.5 seconds. Ok? then i give I can know how much it is costing me on note basis. So everything is working very well. Ok? As I said, both Langath and Langraft are products of the same company. So they are very tightly coupled to each other. And that's why they suggest that whenever you create complex work flows inside Langraft. Always make sure that you integrate Lung Smith with you. Because of creating complex work flows, debugging becomes difficult and in this particular way you can very easily debug your complex graphs. You can also debug . So I personally definitely use length in the process of creating complex graphs or building agentic AI applications. Because not only it helps in debugging but sometimes it also helps me in understanding how the entire graph is functioning. Ok? So it is also a very good learning tool. And Going Forward is our Langraft playlist playing right now. So there too we will create slightly more complex type of work flows. Will create agentic AI applications. There you will see that we will be doing intro integration of length everywhere. Because of that we are not only getting debugging capability but at the same time we are also able to learn how the whole thing is working. Ok? So I really hope you liked the two things I learned so far, integration with Lang Chain and integration with Lang Graph. You have understood both things well and in the future you will not have any problem in integrating Langsmith with any kind of Lang chain or Langgraph code. Ok? so or so guys so far Whatever we have read about length, we have read everything around only one single perspective and that is observability. Where we saw how you can trace any LLM application end to end through langs. But guess what? Langsith is not just used for observability. There are some other aspects as well which you can implement in length. And there are variants. Ok? So even though I'm not going to go into depth about all these things but athlete, I want to give you a little idea of ​​what immense What else can be useful from observability length? Ok? So the second thing is monitoring and alerting. Ok? So what is monitoring? Perhaps you may also know a little. Look here I have written a definition. I'll let you know once I read it out. Then I'll also show you a little bit of the length by going into the UI. So monitoring in Langsmith looks across many traces at once to track the overall health of your LLM system. It aggregates metrics like latency, token usage, cost, error rates and success rates. You can set up alerts to notify you when these metrics drift outside acceptable ranges. Ok? If I tell you in very simple words, what did we study in Observability? We learned in Observability that when you execute your LLM application once, a trace is formed. Ok? And you can observe that trace completely end to end. You can see how each component ran inside that trace. Right? Now obviously your LLM application should run only once. If not, it will run multiple times in a day. Lansith gives you this feature that if you want, you can monitor multiple traces simultaneously on various matrices, like you want to see what was our average latency across all the traces that came today or what was the average token usage or what was the average cost and if you ever need to If you notice that the latency is suddenly increasing then you can immediately go and take some pre-measures. This is the main idea behind monitoring. infac There is also an alerting system here. If you want, you can set an alert. For example, you set an alert in the latency graph that if the latency is greater than 5 seconds, then raise an alert and send a message to our team so that we can immediately go and debug it and bring it back to normal limits. So let me show you how it works in Langseth's UI. So till now we were working on training projects in Observability where we were training one single execution of the LLM application. session. Just below that you will get the option of monitoring. Where again you can select your project. Like I selected Lang Graph Ess Checker. Now here you will notice that you will see many types of graphs. Like the first graph is of the traces, how many traces are coming per day according to your date. Ok? So this could be a curve of usage. Ok? Apart from that, what was the latency of the trace? Ok? What was the error rate of the trace? Like it is visible here that it is zero. How many total LLM calls were made? A What is the latency of LLM calls? You have your own separate graph of cost and token. The trace on cost has a separate graph. How much are output tokens? How much are traces on output tokens? How much are input tokens per trace? How much was the tool used? Ok? And apart from this, you get many other types of graphs when you go to this monitoring section. Ok? Here, if you go to monitoring again, you get the option of alert. What you can do in the alert is that from here you can select one project and In that you can create any custom alert based on some metric which you want to track but this is the limit which should not be more than this. If it is more than that then you can raise an alert on your website or web. Ok? So this is a very important thing. Because think about it, your application is deployed in production and silently some kind of problem arises in it, latency increases or cost starts increasing and you do not even know it, then it can be very very dangerous. Right? So to avoid all these things Here you have the option of monitoring and alerting. Look here it is written in production issues of appearance first edge patterns across multiple runs rather than a single trace. Right? You will not be able to understand from a single trace that the latency of the system has increased. Maybe that's a one off thing. But if you start seeing this pattern in multiple traces over a period of time, latency is increasing. Now that is an important signal which you have to catch. Ok? So monitoring helps you catch these early signals before they impact you. ers at scale. Instead of waiting for customer complaints you're proactively alerted when performance degrades and cost spikes enabling faster response and more reliable applications. Ok? So once again let me summarize. Observability is about studying a single trace. Ok? And monitoring is about having multiple traces. And you study all those traces together. Ok? And alerting is basically that anytime any of your metrics goes above or below a permissible limit you can raise and alert. T. Ok? So this is a very important part and it has very strong support in length. Another thing for which length is used a lot is evaluation. Now what is the basis of evaluation? Let me explain to you. So I have told you multiple times that LLMs are slightly non-deterministic in nature. Which basically means that same input can give you different outputs. Ok? That is probabilistic nature. Ok? Of LLM. Now due to this particular thing, there is not much problem when you use the system. S make around LLMs. If you change even a small thing in that system, it is possible that your output will change significantly. Like if you made a small change in the PRT or you used Model B instead of Model A or you used some other retriever. What will happen in all these scenarios is that your input is still the same. The input given by the user is still the same. But the output varies a lot. And in such scenarios, it is possible that you benchmark the output of your LLM in some way. You Evaluate it and if the evaluation is above a certain threshold then only you deploy that LLM system. Ok? Look here it is written that LLM behavior can be unpredictable. A small change in prep models and retrieval logic improves some cases but breaks others. Evaluation provides an objective repeatable way to track performance over time ensuring that new versions are actually better and preventing regressions. Ok? As soon as you're putting a new upgrade into production. How do you know that from the last one It will be better. Because here there is this probabilistic behavior of the LLM. Maybe you made some changes, deployed them, and now your app's performance is worse than the previous version. So how do you measure whether the new version is better than the previous one? This is where evaluation comes in handy. Ok? So look here it is written Evaluation in Lancet helps you systematically measure the quality of your LLM outputs. You Can Run Tests Again Gold Standard Data Sets or Apply Custom Evaluation Matrix True Edge Faithfulness Relevance and completeness. LangSmith supports multiple approaches Automated scoring with LLM as a judge Semantic similarity checks and even custom Python evaluators and can be done online You can also do the evaluation offline. Ok? So your basic idea in evaluation is that you try out the LLM system you have created on some standardized data sets which the whole world knows that this should be the output for this input. Apart from this, some other metrics are already predefined. Faithful Ness, completeness, lots of things like that. And many evaluation methods have also already come into the picture. For example, a very famous method is LLM as a Judge. Where you use one LLM to evaluate another LLM based system. So this whole thing, this whole ecosystem, you get it in Langsyth. Ok? How and where let me show you. So again if you go to Training Projects where all your projects exist. There you can work on any project. You can go to evaluators by clicking here. And you can set up an evaluator for your current project. By clicking on this you can appoint different types of evaluators. If you want, you can use your own data. You can also create the data from scratch. You can write your own functions. And there are some prebuilt evaluators. You can use them also. Like here you have got a prebuilt evaluator to check hallucinations. Got it to check the consignment. The code is mixed for checker. ok ? Apart from this, if you want, you can also define your own evaluators here. But again this is not the topic of our video. Therefore we will not go into too much depth. In fact, I will tell you that the whole thing that I am teaching you, monitoring is done, evaluation is done, one or two things, now and I will tell you all this comes under a broad umbrella term which we call LLM Ops, perhaps you must have heard this term, so there, when you study LLM Ops, then you learn all these things well, understand and that kind of thing. OFF is a specialized job role. Ok? So hopefully we'll cover that in a different playlist or course in the future. But my goal right now is that I want to give you an overview and an idea of ​​what other uses there are of Langmith apart from observability. So so far we have seen two things. Apart from observability we saw monitoring and alerting and now we saw evaluation. Apart from this, there are some other things which I will tell you next. There is another very important thing that length helps you do. . And its name is Prapp Experimentation. Now I probably don't need to tell you how important PrEP is in Generative AI. So much so that a field of its own has been formed around it, which we call rapid engineering. How much good performance you can extract from an LLM also depends on how well you have written the prep. And that's why when you're building systems like chatbots, rag systems and agents into your prepping it should be on point. but how do you No, if you have two prompts, PP A, PP B, which one is better? Even if you try it once and look at the chart on GPT, it does not provide any conclusive evidence that PP A is better than PP B. So here you have to plan very systematically that how do you decide which is the better option in option A versus option B? This is called preliminary experimentation. What you do in prompt experimentation is that you pick a data set and test your prompt on that data set. You do this with the help of some evaluation criteria. Ok? And Lungsmath helps you in doing this whole thing. So essentially speaking, you do AB testing of preps with the help of Lansith. Look what is written here. PRP experimentation in length allows you to systematically test and compare different PRP versions. You can run AB tests across preps on the same data set. Track their performance against the evaluation matrix and record the outcomes. Results Are Strong Over Time Giving You A Clear history of which prop variations worked best and under what conditions. Ok? A So if I show you how to do this, look here there is a section called Prp Engineering. In this, if you go to the playground, what you can do in the playground is you can actually hit compare. Ok? And what can you do here? Here you can setup your PRT. And you can also provide your schema here. You can setup any evaluation criteria from here. Even you test your models too Can do. Meaning, if you want to check which medal model is giving you the best results, then you can try out the same product on two different models. So this is the playground where you can test out your problems and their performance against some evaluation criteria. Ok? So my plan in future is when we will make a playlist of prompt engineering on this channel. There I will show you all these things practically. Ok? Apart from this you get one more option. You get one more feature In gsth. If you want, you can do versioning of your prompts here. Ok? So you can store your preps here. Your teammates can collaborate on that. If you want, you can also go to public places and visualize it. You can see with the help of Lang Chen Hub. So this is kind of a place where you can host all your projects in a very good way. Ok? So you get a lot of features around the tips also inside Langsmath. Next another very solid feature that Lansith provides you is Data Set Creation and Annotation. So as I told you, to do evaluation you need a standardized data set. It can either be one of the publicly available data sets or you can create your own data set according to your use case. Lansith provides you this option. Ok? Look here it is written. Langsyth provides tools to build data sets for evaluation and fine tuning. If you want you can also do manual annotation. Ok? meaning you can label your of data set. Ok? How right or wrong was the response that came from the LLM. You can do this labeling. And stores data set versions for reuse across projects. Obviously you can also do versioning of data. For example, what are you doing? You're building a customer chat bot. And along the way what are you doing? You are building a data set for the most common questions and expected answers that will help you test all future versions of your application. Ok? so how am i you Let me tell you quickly. So here you will see a section with evaluation. In that if you go to Data Sets and Experiments. So what can you do here? You can either setup a new experiment for evaluation or if you want you can set up a new data set. Ok? So you can also import some existing data or if you want you can create an apt data set in which you can then add data. How to add data? So suppose you have been training for this project and this part is You are studying the circular trace. Now here you get the option that if you want, you can set add to data. Ok? As soon as you set add to data, it will be added as a row in the data set you have just created. Ok? Now if you want, you can also make annotations in it. You can add labels as per your choice. Like you can see here. As soon as you put it in the annotation queue, it will start appearing here and from here you will keep annotating it. And this whole thing is very properly organized. Is and remains reusable. If you are creating a data set in your account, it can be used for any project that you create in your account. Ok? So again a variant thing but again something that we can't cover in detail in this video. But I promise that in future whenever we will work on LLM Ops, I will show you all these things practically. There are two more important features I would like to talk about. One of them is user feedback integration. So you must have noticed that whenever you use chart GPT When any answer of Chart GPT is printed on the screen, Chart GPT gives you some options below. There are two options among them. Thumbs up, thumbs down. And by using these options you can tell Chat GPT or Open AI whether you liked that particular response or not. We call this user feedback. And obviously just like any other feedback it helps in improving your LLM system. Langsmath gives you this feature that you can add this kind of mechanism to your LLM app. look at what is written here It lets you capture thumbs up and down ratings or structured feedback from users in production. Feedback is locked along side traces tied to the exact product model and state and it also supports bulk analysis of what users like and dislike. You get complete analysis in the monitoring tab. Let me show you where it appears exactly. So if you go here and pick up any trace of any project, like let's say we pick up this trace. So here we are always still on the run Had been focusing. But look here you have a feedback option. This is the place where the feedback is locked. So along with every trace, we can record its feedback and then we can go to monitoring and see it. Ok? Here in the feedback score below, we can also start seeing that across traces. So at the same time we are also getting to know what kind of sentiment is there among the users regarding the LLM application. So this is also a small but very important feature that Lungsoth is providing you. and the last feature What I would like to talk about is collaboration. Lansmith is designed in such a way that teams can very effectively build an LLM application using Lansmith. Till now, when tools like Length were not available, how did collaboration happen mostly? For example, if there is a high latency in a particular execution time or the cost is high, then what people used to do is take snapshots and tag them on the mail saying, look, this is the issue. Now after the arrival of Lansith, obviously you are able to trace everything very properly first of all. yes. But Lansith is also giving you this option that you can quickly copy its link by clicking on this button here and you can share it with anyone. As soon as you share this link with someone, that person can visualize and study the exact stress on his machine as it is. So this whole thing becomes very helpful in collaboration. Similarly, if you are experimenting with preps, you can do versioning there too, and invite collaborators. infact Here you have the option to create your own dashboard. You can create a custom dashboard and share it with anyone. So these short lengths have been designed from scratch in such a way that teams can use them very effectively. So collaboration is a big problem especially when you are working with big large teams where these tools can be very very handy. Okay so in a nutshell this was the discussion that I wanted to have. We read Langsith in a lot of detail but what I focused on the most was We touched on the observability aspect, but beyond that, Lang Smith can do a lot of things. We read about monitoring, read about evaluation, read about prompt experimentation, read about data set creation and annotation, read about user feedback integration and finally read about collaboration. All these things that we have read, we can broadly put them in LLM Ops. And hopefully in the future we will launch a video or playlist or a course around it. And there when you read this whole thing, you will get a better perspective that building LLM apps is one thing but running it effectively in production without having problems is a whole different game. Ok? So I really hope you liked this two and a half hour long video. You got a little perspective. You learned some new things. If you liked this video please like. If you have not subscribed to this channel, please do subscribe. See you in the next video. Bye.